Writing Dissertations: A Guide

Based on editions of the Publication Manual of the American
Psychological Association up to and including the 7th

Dr Gordon Millar

Autumn 2020 Edition
The author will appreciate any feedback on this document. This should be sent by email
to gordon.millar@hslu.ch. Comment will help to improve future editions.

Table of Contents
Note

3

Preface

4

Organizing Your Ideas
Length, Headings and Tone of the Work to be Produced

5
5

Parts of Your Dissertation

6

Using English Appropriately and Correctly
Punctuation and Capitalisation

13
14

2.2

Italicising and Abbreviating

16

2.3

Quotations

17

2.4

Numbers and Symbols

18

Tables and Figures
Tables

20
20

Figures

21

Footnotes and Appendices
Footnotes

24
24

Appendices

24

Reference Citations in the Text and Bibliography
Reference Citations in the Text

26
26

5.2

Bibliography

29

5.3

Other non-APA standards

35

6.

The Abstract/Management Summary

37

7.
7.1

Final Submission
Paper or bound submission

38
38

Online or electronic submission

39

Presenting Your Dissertation

40

Bibliography

42

Appendix A: Declaration of Sole Authorship

43

Appendix B: Checklist for Dissertation Preparation

44

1.
1.1
1.2
2.
2.1

3.
3.1
3.2
4.
4.1
4.2
5.
5.1

7.2
8.

2

Note
This guide uses the word “dissertation” and not “thesis”. In UK English, which
the Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts has adopted as standard,
“thesis” is most often used for doctoral research reports and “dissertation” for
bachelor’s and master’s final papers. In the University’s regulations and in everyday
use, the German-language norm (i.e. “thesis” instead of “dissertation”) has
established itself in the English used locally.

3

Preface
With the introduction of taught-in-English degree programmes at bachelor’s
and master’s level in 2008, there arose the need for a guide to be written for students
required to write dissertations and research papers in English. At the time it was
decided that the American Psychological Association (APA) style and referencing
system would be chosen to serve as the basis for the taught-in-English dissertations
and research papers guide. The present periodically revised document is based on
the Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association, now in its
seventh edition. The main reasons for this decision were the advantage of having one
standard for the whole institution and the resulting ease of a common context for
those colleagues with responsibility for teaching methodological skills.
The user of this guide should not expect a one-to-one correspondence between
the material presented here and what is in the relevant APA manuals. The reasons
are as follows:
•
•

•

•

The decision of the Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts to use
British rather than US English as its standard has obvious detailed
implications for the use of APA and other standards.
The APA Publication Manual is precisely that, a manual intended to
provide guidance and standards for academics and researchers preparing
their material for publication in research journals. The present guide is,
however, primarily intended for use by students preparing dissertations
and research papers which are, in many cases, unlikely to be published.
Degree dissertations below doctoral level have a didactical character which
must be recognised in the style guide relevant to their preparation. An
example is to be found in the difference between the APA’s recommended
form for an Introduction, which includes a statement of a hypothesis and
discussion of relevant literature, and the guidance given here on the
writing of a separate Literature Review.
There are simply matters on which the APA standard makes no, or very
little, comment, for instance on matters such as choice of font or length.

Basing a dissertation-writing guide on a recognised style and referencing
system is of most use with respect referencing. It is in this area, and with regard to
the preparation of bibliographies, that this document attempts to make only strictly
necessary departures from what the APA standard requires.
It is appropriate to say a word on cultural differences. Writing for research
purposes in English takes place within a cultural framework. Those who work in both
the taught-in-English and in the taught-in-German environment will be aware of the
differences between the two. Those more familiar with the one or the other may take
exception to the advice offered in this guide. As with all matters, tolerance and
adjustment on the part of the user are called for.
Gordon Millar

4

1. Organizing Your Ideas
In a practically oriented environment the process of research and the
production of results are usually seen as useful. The writing up of a dissertation or
research paper is often viewed as a tedious necessity, driven by the need to satisfy
educational rather than profitable considerations. It is worth pausing to reflect that,
if the results are not recorded then the work will very quickly be forgotten. If the
research is not explained in the context of both relevant theory and the work of
others in the field, it will lack credibility. If the explanation of the need for the
research and recording of the results is not followed up by analysis and
recommendations, then the value of what has been done will be left unexploited.
Finally, if all these steps are not carried out in crisp and correct English, with sources
not properly identified and referenced, and supporting tables, figures and
appendices not integrated into the main thrust of the work, then the message will
appear shoddy.
Before you begin to write anything, you should consider the following factors:
1.1 Length, Headings and Tone of the Work to be Produced
1.11 Length. What is the normal length of the paper, dissertation, or article
you are expected to write? In the English-speaking world this is measured not in
terms of the number of pages, but rather in terms of the number of words. A degree
dissertation, for example, is typically 12,000 to 15,000 words in length, excluding
appendices, footnotes, tables, figures and references. A master’s level applied
research paper may be less extensive at 8,000 to 12,000 words.
1.12 Headings. When you have answered this question you will be in a
position to sit down and construct an initial hierarchy of headings for the work. This
“scaffolding” of initial headings should convey two elements of your report:
a)
b)

the sequence of your ideas
the levels of importance which you attach to any particular part of your
material

Your headings will help the reader to grasp the organisation of your writing. In
comparison to academic writing in German, headings in English are often fewer in
number. If you find yourself tempted to open up a level of sub-chapters with three
digits after the decimal point (e.g. 2.335), then think again. The latest edition of
APA recommends that no numbering be used with sections, but this
guide has retained the older APA format and suggests up to two figures
after the decimal point in section headings. Each chapter should start with the
highest level of heading and should follow the same top-down progression, even if
different sections make use of a different number of levels of heading.
You will note that this guide, which is written in APA style, uses four levels.
This hierarchy of headings based on the APA recommendations is as follows:
5

(Level 1):

1. Centred, Bold, Uppercase and Lowercase Headings
(Text begins as a new paragraph.)

(Level 2):
1.1. Left Justified, Bold, Uppercase and Lowercase Headings
(Text begins as a new paragraph.)
(Level 3):
1.11. Indented, Bold, Uppercase and Lowercase Headings Ending
With a Full Stop. (Text begins on the same line and continues as a regular
paragraph.)
(Level 4):
Indented, bold, italicised, lowercase paragraph headings ending
with a full stop. (Text begins on the same line and continues as a regular
paragraph.)
When selecting the levels of heading to use within a text, it is necessary to first
identify the finest (lowest) level of subheading category. If there is one level, use
Level 1 only; with two levels, use Levels 1 and 2; and with three levels, use Levels 1, 2
and 3, and so on.
Elements in a series are identified by letters within a paragraph (a), (b), (c) and
by numbers at the beginning of separate paragraphs in a series of conclusions or
steps.
1.13 Tone. You are going to be engaged in what is known as academic or socialscientific writing. This means you should express yourself logically, rationally and
directly. You should avoid ideas or accompanying language that is sensational or
combative. This said, you should write your paper to be interesting and, in terms of
its argument, compelling.
1.2 Parts of Your Dissertation
Your dissertation should include the following parts:
•

A cover page, which in the following order should state:
1. The title of the work: the title should be a concise statement of the
main topic and should identify the issues being investigated, relevant
variables and the relationship between these elements. A title should be
understandable when it alone is read. A good example might be: “Effects of
Restricted Credit on Business Start-ups in Central Switzerland”.
2. Author’s/Authors’ name(s): you should use your full first and
family names(s).

6

3. (If necessary) Class and/or degree-course major.
4. Name of the school and the degree course for which the
dissertation is being written. This should take the following form:
“Introductory/Project/Degree (delete as appropriate) Dissertation submitted
as part of the requirements for the MSc in Business Administration at the
School of Business, Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts”
5. Month and year.
A cover page may include a suitable illustration. The best illustrations are
thoughtful, low-key material that is connected with, or suggestive of the
subject matter of your work. You should remember with this, and any
other illustration, to include a reference to its source.
•

A title page, which should repeat the information on the cover page. It
should, in addition, give the email address(es) of the author(s) and directly
afterwards the first and family names of your supervisor(s), together with
their relevant academic title(s), and business email address(es).

•

An abstract/management summary. This should be a brief,
comprehensive summary of your work. It is intended to allow readers to
survey the contents of your article quickly. You should ensure that the first
paragraph contains a statement of the topic of the dissertation and its
significance, as well as an indication of the major outcome of your
research. Abstracts are often placed on databases and the first paragraph
may be all the user of such a database reads. Many database users will be
reluctant to scroll down and read the whole of your abstract if their
attention is not caught by the first paragraph.
Please note that an abstract/management summary is NOT the same as an
introduction.
At the end of the abstract/management summary you should include
keywords. These should appear as a separate paragraph in lower case
(apart from proper names), separated by commas and with no full stop at
the end. They should be about five in number and introduced with the
label Keywords: (in italics) at the start of the line.

•

A table of contents (including page numbers). This should quickly
convey the organisation and structure of your material. Specifically:
-

The Table of Contents normally includes only Level 1 and
Level 2 headings as the others are so-called paragraph headings.
Chapter and sub-chapter titles should be expressive of the content of
the relevant section of the work. Single-word titles usually fail to do
this and should not be used.

7

-

The numbering of chapters and sub-chapters begins and ends with
the main body of your work. The Table of Contents, Preface,
Bibliography, etc. are not numbered.
The pages of all chapters, sub-chapters and other sections of the
dissertation, including the appendices, should be consecutively
numbered beginning with the title page.

The table of contents may be followed by any or all of the following: a List
of Illustrations, a List of Tables, a List of Interviews Held, and a
List of Abbreviations Used. You may also include at this point a Note
on any formal matter you consider to be important, for example on your
use of subject-specific terminology.
•

A preface. The preface is an optional part of a dissertation which should
not include the social-scientific or academic discussion of the topic. This is
rather the place to include personal comments. These may be, for example,
on:
-

•

your personal reasons for your choice of subject
your experiences during the process of producing your work
the thanks you wish to express to those who have helped you

An introduction which should:
-

introduce the problem and explain why it is important. You may wish
to make use of a rhetorical question or two to do this: “Why is this
topic worth pursuing” or “What does the commissioner of this project
want to know?”

-

include what might be called the dissertation statement. This
should say precisely what the aim of the work is. It should also
introduce any related and relevant sub-topics. You may wish to
rephrase the title of your dissertation to do this. So from “Effects of
Restricted Credit on Business Start-ups in Central Switzerland” might
come:
“This dissertation seeks to assess the effect of tighter credit on the
number and scale of new businesses which have been started up in
Central Switzerland in the last nine months. A discussion of this topic
naturally requires an analysis of the extent to which credit has
become more difficult to acquire in the same period.”

-

offer a research question and, if appropriate, a hypothesis about
the topic of the dissertation which the following work will either
prove or disprove. Referring again to the topic mentioned in the
previous point, a possible research question and related hypothesis
might be:
8

Research question: “Are tighter credit conditions affecting the
number and scale of business start-ups in Central Switzerland?”
Hypothesis: “It is contended that the current credit situation is
having no noticeable effect on business start-ups in Central
Switzerland.”
-

give the reader useful indications on how the dissertation is
organised, its division into chapters, its inclusion of appendices and
its provision of bibliographical, diagrammatic and tabular
information.

•

The Literature Review. In a practically oriented degree course
literature reviews are often seen as “nice to have”. They are frequently
described as unnecessary for the external commissioner of the work. A
literature review is, however, most necessary to give you, as a writer,
credibility. It does this because in the review you should provide a
scholarly analysis of the work of others relevant to your subject. In this
way you show that you are aware of the context your work is taking place
in and that you have selected your desk-based sources with conscious care.
Your literature review should not be exhaustive, but rather authoritative.
In other words, you should review the most important relevant work of
others. In reviewing the work of others, concentrate on their findings and
conclusions, and any interesting methodological comparisons between
their approach and yours. You can also make any necessary comments on
any limitations in these sources.
In your literature review you should be fair and avoid colourful,
judgemental language. If there are areas of controversy, then state what
the differences are and the questions that are left unanswered. Do not try
to resolve social-scientific or academic disputes by giving personal
opinions.
Your literature review should finish by making one or both of two points
clear. Firstly, if there is sufficient literature to make this possible, you
should identify the “gap” that your work fits into. In other words you
should establish the continuity between other previous work and what you
are doing in your dissertation. Secondly, you should establish where deskbased research ends and where field research begins and is necessary.

•

Methods/Procedures. This part of your dissertation describes in detail
how your study was conducted. You should make it possible for the reader
to evaluate the appropriateness of the methods you used and therefore the
reliability, validity and ethical standard of your results.
If your study involves a piece of interview-based or qualitative research,
you should explain the questions you put, the selection of your sample of
interview partners, and the analytical methods you intend to use. If, on the
other hand, you are doing a quantitative survey, you should describe the

9

survey instrument you used (e.g. the questionnaire), the size of the sample
taken and the statistical methods you intend to apply.
With any method you describe you should include a brief discussion of its
advantages and drawbacks. With statistical methods in particular you
should be clear about whether your work is intended to be representative
and, if it is not, what steps you are taking to compensate and allow for this
in your work. It is vital that your dissertation does not make
claims or reach conclusions which go beyond what your
methods and especially your sample warrant.
•

Results. In this section you should give the results of your research in
such a way that they are clear and easily grasped overall by the reader.
Tables, charts and other diagrammatic figures may help in achieving this.
These should always be referred to and commented on in the
text. Generally your results should be given in sufficient detail to support
your conclusions.

•

Discussion/Conclusions. In this part of your dissertation you should
give your reasoned opinions about the results you have detailed.
Everything must be justified by the results, by a combination of relevant
theory and results, or by a drawing together of your desk and field
research. There should be no generalisations or speculations that lack this
foundation. This section should not simply reach conclusions. There must
be a discussion, or critique, of what has been carried out that leads up to
such conclusions. If this section involves a repetition of the results to make
it intelligible, then it may be sensible to combine it with your “Results”
section, giving a “Results and Discussion/Conclusions” chapter.
You should start this section by answering positively or negatively the
problem posed in the dissertation statement, research question and
hypothesis, if you included one, given in your introduction. At this point
you should comment on the appropriateness of the methods you chose to
use and the resultant validity, reliability and ethical acceptability of your
results.
You should end this discussion/conclusions part of your dissertation by
commenting on the practical and theoretical importance of your findings.
If this commentary is to be extensive, then it may be appropriate to adopt
the order “Results and Discussion” and then “Conclusions”. Whether your
comments on the importance of your findings are included in the same
chapter as the discussion, or whether they stand alone as a “Conclusions”
section, you should consider at this stage whichever of the following issues
are relevant to your dissertation:
-

why the problem was important and what larger issues hinge on your
findings
the level of analysis and, in particular, how your findings can be
linked to issues at a more complex level of study
the extent to which your results agree with those of other researchers
the extent to which your results are applicable in other fields
10

•

Recommendations. In dissertations completed for an external sponsor
or client this may be the part of your work that gets most attention. In
contrast to the reserved, conditional and relative tone of your methods,
findings and discussion/conclusions sections, the recommendations part
of your work should be direct and decisive. You can afford to make
justified choices here. You can also feel free to choose a form which makes
clear how your recommendations could be implemented. This might not
be a text, but, for example, a time chart with commentary. This part of
your dissertation should be kept short and the reader should be able to
grasp its contents quickly.
With reference to the position of recommendations in a dissertation, they
may be placed after the discussion/conclusions section, or after the
discussion of the findings and before the conclusions to the whole work
(which will then include reflection on its overall usefulness and importance
– including, in this case, reflection on the recommendations).

•

Bibliography/References. All citations in the text of your dissertation
must appear in the bibliography and all the works listed in your
bibliography must be cited in the text. Your bibliography does not need to
be exhaustive but rather succinct. It should include enough references to
support your research and should not be padded out with items simply
intended to impress.

•

Appendix/Appendices. This is the place to include material which
would disturb the flow of your dissertation if it were included in your main
text. Usually the reason is its bulk. Examples include detailed tables with
the raw data of a questionnaire-based survey, or a list of questions used for
a semi-structured interview with the answers of interview partners so
entered as to disguise their identity. Other material which might be
included in an appendix includes any special computer programme used,
or a statistical test that may not be widely known. If there is more than one
appendix they should be numbered. If you have several appendices, and
especially if they are divided into sub-sections, then you should include a
List of Appendices, either at the start of the Appendices section, or with
other Lists after the Table of Contents.

•

Declaration of Sole Authorship. It may especially be a requirement of
final degree dissertations to include a signed Affidavit or Declaration of
Sole Authorship with each copy submitted for examination. You should
use a recognised formula for this and it should appear on a separate page
of its own. An example is included in Appendix A of this paper.

To help readers orient themselves it is recommended to give each page a
running header (in word-processing packages usually inserted in a small font size in
the “Header” of the “Header and Footer” sections). The APA recommends the use of
the first two or three words from a chapter or section title for such headers. So for the

11

next chapter of this guide “Using English” in the centre of the header of every page
except the first page, in the form Using English, would be appropriate.

12

2. Using English Appropriately and Correctly

This chapter begins with a general section on appropriate style and then goes on
to consider detailed aspects such as punctuation, the use of italics and the correct
way to write numerical information. For obvious reasons no attempt is made to
provide an exhaustive guide to language issues, but rather to concentrate on those
issues which experience shows often lead to doubt and difficulty.
It has already been stated that there is a suitable tone for text which is academic
or scientific in purpose. This is matched by style which is appropriate to expressing
ideas, while at the same time removing bias and emotion as far as possible. The
elements of such style are as follows:
•

•

•

•

•

Your text should make good use of thought units (the sentence, paragraph,
sub-chapter or chapter) to achieve a continuity throughout. Various
language tools exist to facilitate orderly writing. Punctuation acts like road
signs, guiding the reader through the text at sentence level. Transitional
words and discourse markers act like a map, signalling to the reader the
connections between different parts of the text. Transitional words can
include the use of a pronoun for a previously mentioned noun (as long as
the referent is clear). Discourse markers can include time links (then,
next), cause-effect links (therefore, as a result), addition links (in addition,
similarly), and contrast links (conversely, whereas).
Your text should read smoothly. Avoid ambiguity, sudden changes of topic
or even tense, and abrupt beginnings or endings. One section of your
dissertation should lead into another, the move from one to the other
being signalled both forwards and, in the succeeding section, backwards.
The reader should, in other words, be guided through the work.
Use language economically. This can be achieved by using short, simple
words and sentences where necessary. You should avoid jargon, wordiness
and redundant expressions. Ruthlessly weed out colourful, judgemental
and generalising adjectives and adverbs such as best, huge, most, widely,
commonly, and extremely.
Make sure every word is used for what you really mean. Feel is not a
substitute for think and believe. Think and believe do not mean the same
thing. Don’t use approximations such as practically all. Avoid the use of
this, that, these and those with reference to something in a previous
sentence that is unclear without a repetition of the referent (this test, those
participants).
In an attempt to sound objective do not use the third person (“The author
decided to question 50 people” – referring to yourself). Equally do not
practice anthropomorphism, the attribution of human characteristics to
animals or inanimate objects (“The economic promotion office was
persuaded to allow several of its employees to be interviewed”). Use we to
refer only to yourself and your coauthors (I if you are the sole author) and
not to describe wider indeterminate groups (“We are used in Central

13

•

•

•

•

Switzerland to a business-friendly economic climate” – meaning the
citizens of the six Central Swiss cantons).
A judicious mixture of I/we, the passive to focus on the object of a
sentence (“The survey was sent to 100 firms in Central Switzerland”), and
of sentences which use subjects other than the author as a referent (“This
research covers start-ups of small and medium-sized enterprises in Central
Switzerland”) helps to convey objectivity of approach.
Use active rather than passive verb constructions as much as possible. This
will also help you to avoid the so-called dangling modifier: “The
participants were tested using this procedure” (poor) – “Using this
procedure, I tested the participants” (much better, because it is clear that
“I” and not “the participants” used the procedure).
Avoid labelling people. Participants in a study tend to lose their
individuality as they are categorised as its objects. The bankrupts, the
start-ups, etc. are better described either using adjectival forms (“the
bankrupt entrepreneurs”) or with a noun followed by a descriptive phrase
(“the entrepreneurs who have recently started up businesses”).
Use language which is free from gender bias. English offers a variety of
ways to avoid statements such as: “When an individual businessman uses
this kind of controlling policy, he is in a much stronger position to ...”.
Examples include:
“When an individual entrepreneur uses this kind of controlling policy,
that person is in a much stronger position to ...”
“When individual business people use this kind of controlling policy,
they are in a much stronger position to ...”
Statements that the use of “he” and “his” can be taken to include both
masculine and feminine subjects are not acceptable in English. Likewise
you should use “he and she” sparingly, and you should avoid clumsy forms
such as “(s)he” and “he/she”. Instead use the possibilities English offers to
express yourself in a gender-neutral fashion.

2.1 Punctuation and Capitalisation
2.11 The comma. Commas are used:
•

to separate elements (including before and and or) in a series of three or
more items – “the turnover, profit, or tax liability”

•

to separate off non-defining clauses – “This was the author’s contention,
which he published in a later paper.”

•

to set off the year in exact dates beginning with the month – November 25,
1956 (but 25 November 1956)

14

•

to separate groups of three digits in numbers of 1,000 or more

2.12 The semicolon. Semicolons are used:
•

to separate elements in a series that already contain commas –
“purchasing order 22 was lot one, lot seven, lot four; order 23 was lot two,
lot seven, lot nine”

2.13 The colon. Colons are used:
•

between a grammatically complete introductory clause (one that could
function as a sentence) and a final phrase/clause that illustrates, extends
or amplifies the preceding thought. If the clause following the colon is a
complete sentence, then it begins with a capital letter.

2.14 The dash. Dashes are used:
•

to indicate a sudden interruption in the continuity of a sentence (overuse
can weaken the flow of your material). Please note that a hyphen (-) is used
within a word and is not a dash (–), which is used within a sentence.

2.15 Double quotation marks (when not used for quoting directly
from a source). Double quotation marks are used:
•

to express irony, slang usage, or to mark an invented expression. In such
cases quotation marks are only used the first time the word or term
appears – the company’s “environmentally friendly” energy policy resulted
in a higher carbon footprint than that of its competitors.

•

to set off the title of an article or a chapter in a book when it is mentioned
in the text – Friendly’s 1992 article “Doing Business in a Recession” has
become a seminal text in management literature.

Double quotation marks should not be used:
•

to introduce a key or technical term. This should instead be italicised –
The expression zero-based budgeting appears several times in this
textbook.

2.16 Parentheses. Parentheses are used:
•

to introduce an abbreviation – the Lucerne School of Business (HSLU-W)
is situated in Central Switzerland

15

2.17 Brackets. Brackets are used:
•
to enclose parenthetical material that is already within parentheses – (The
company’s results [adjusted for inflation] are to be found in Appendix D.)
2.18 Capital (uppercase) letters in headings and titles.
•

Major words in headings, sub-headings, titles of books and articles
mentioned in the text, in table titles, and in figures legends, are all
capitalised. Conjunctions, articles (the, a, an), and short prepositions are
not considered major words. All words of four letters or more are
capitalised, as are verbs, nouns, adjectives and adverbs. With hyphenated
words, both should be capitalised. The first word after a colon or a dash in
a heading is capitalised.

2.19 Lowercase letters.
•

The names of models, theories or hypotheses are not capitalised – the
empirical law of effect; Smith’s notion of the invisible hand

2.2 Italicising and Abbreviating
2.21 Italics. Italics should be used for:
•

the introduction of a new, technical or key term or label (after a term has
been used once it should not be italicised again) – the term selling long

•

letters, words or phrases used as linguistic examples – words such as
profit and loss

Italics should not be used for:
•

foreign words and abbreviations which are common in English – et al., visà-vis, a priori

•

mere emphasis (you should express this linguistically) - it is important to
bear in mind (italics is not necessary)

2.22 Abbreviations. Abbreviations should be used sparingly. The best rule of
thumb is to use only generally recognised abbreviations and otherwise to abbreviate
when considerable space can be saved and cumbersome repetition avoided. In all
cases, the first time a term is used in the text it must be written out fully and
immediately followed by the abbreviation in parentheses. Thereafter only the
abbreviation should be used in the text (i.e. do not switch between the written-out
and abbreviated forms of a term). It is suggested that this procedure is repeated
afresh in each chapter.

16

A very few abbreviations are accepted as words (IQ, AIDS), in other words they
do not need to be written out on first use.
With Latin abbreviations (e.g., i.e., etc., vs.), these should only be used in
parenthetical material. In the text English translations should be used (for example,
that is, and so on, versus).
Full stops should be used with Latin abbreviations and with the initials of
names. They should not be used for capital letter abbreviations and acronyms (APA,
EPA, NASA).
Abbreviations which are not generally recognised, are not accepted as words,
and are not from Latin should either be included in a List of Abbreviations, or where
these others require lengthier explanation, they should be dealt with in a Note.
2.3 Quotations
Short quotations (fewer than 40 words) should be incorporated into the text
and enclosed within double quotation marks. Longer quotations (more than 40
words) should be set in a freestanding block of text. This should be indented 1.3 cm
from the left-hand margin and should not be enclosed within quotation marks.
If material in the original source was quoted, this should be set within single
quotation marks within your quotation (which will be in double quotation marks as a
whole) in a short quotation. Within a longer, indented quotation material quoted in
the original source should be set in double quotation marks.
If your quotation includes a citation, then this should be retained. The work
which is cited within the quotation does not, however, require to be included in your
bibliography (unless you cite it yourself elsewhere).
The following changes may be made to quoted material without explanation:
•
•
•

The first letter of quoted material may be changed to an uppercase or
lowercase letter.
The punctuation mark at the end of a sentence may be changed to fit the
syntax.
Single quotation marks may be changed to double quotation marks and
vice versa (see above).

The following changes made to quoted material require an explanation:
•

•

Use three spaced ellipsis points within a sentence to show that you have
omitted material from the original source (. . .). Any omission between two
sentences should be indicated with four points (the first is the full stop at
the end of the preceding sentence). Do not use ellipsis points at the
beginning or end of any quotation unless you need to emphasise that the
quotation ends in mid-sentence.
Use brackets, not parentheses, to enclose material (e.g. an explanation)
inserted into a quotation by some person other than the original author.

17

•

If you want to add emphasis within a quotation, then italicise the word(s)
concerned and immediately afterwards insert within brackets the words
[italics added].

Otherwise quotations should follow the wording, spelling, and interior
punctuation of the original source, even if this source is incorrect. If any incorrect
element in the quotation might confuse readers, then you should insert [sic]
immediately after the error.
If you quote material originally written in a language other than English, then
you should give the original text in double quotation marks followed by an English
translation in parentheses.
2.4 Numbers and Symbols
2.41 Numbers. Arabic numbers are used to express:
•
•
•
•
•
•

numbers of 10 and above
numbers below 10 that are grouped for comparison with numbers of 10
and above – 4 out of every 20 respondents
numbers that immediately precede a unit of measurement – 8.5 cm
numbers that represent time, ages, sample sizes, numbers of participants
in a survey, scores on a scale, and exact sums of money – 2 weeks ago, 2year-olds, 5 participants, scored 4 on a 9-point scale, were paid £4 each
numbers that denote a specific place in a numbered series, parts of books
and tables, and each number in a list of four and more numbers – Trial 4;
page 7; row 5; 1, 3, 4 and 8 words respectively
all numbers in an abstract or management summary

Words are used to express:
•
•
•
•
•

numbers below ten that do not represent precise measurements and that
are grouped for comparison with numbers below 10 – two words that
mean, five out of seven trials
zero and one when not used in context with numbers 10 and above – zerobased budgeting
numbers which begin a sentence, title or text heading
common fractions – two-thirds majority
commonly accepted terms – the Ten Commandments

A combination of arabic numbers and words is used to express:
•
•

rounded large numbers (starting with millions) – almost 4 million people
back-to-back modifiers – twenty 6-year-olds

18

Plurals of numbers are written without an apostrophe – 1950s, fours and sixes
2.42 Metric symbols. These should be written without full stops and in the
plural without s or es. – 45 cm. In the case of litres, an uppercase L should be used
for whole units (23 L) and a lowercase l for fractions of a litre (9 dl).
2.43 The symbol for percent. The symbol for percent should be used only
when it is preceded by a numeral. When a number is not given the word percentage
should be used. – 8% of businesses; the percentage of businesses affected

19

3. Tables and Figures

The following general rule will help you to decide how best to present your

data:
•
•
•

if you have 3 or fewer numbers, use a sentence
if you have from 4 to 20 numbers, use a table
if you have more than 20 numbers, consider using a graph or figure
instead of a table

Whether you decide to use a table or a figure, you must comment on it in the
text, that is explain the material without simply repeating it. Illustrations of any kind
are never self-explanatory.
When using statistical material you should include sufficient information to
allow the reader to fully understand the analyses conducted and to appreciate the
possible alternative explanations for the results of the analyses. What makes up
sufficient information depends on the analytical approach selected. The more
commonly known the approach, the less you need to explain it.
3.1 Tables
The following table shows the basic elements this form of illustration can have.
It also shows the advantage of including derivative material (here the “Difference”
columns) to help the reader more quickly grasp the information the table contains.
Table 1
Exam Results of Candidates With and Without Previous Work Experience
Commercial school-leavers
Result

With

Without

Difference

Grammar school-leavers
With

Without

Difference

6

280

240

40

281

232

49

5

297

251

46

290

264

26

4

260

301

- 41

255

295

- 40

3

195

250

- 55

190

230

- 40

Note. Grades have been rounded to the nearest whole.
The following detailed points should be observed when working with tables:

20

•
•
•

•
•

•
•

•

The number and title (on the next line and in italics) of the table is placed
above it. Titles of tables should be listed in a List of Tables with the page
number on which they appear (see section 1.02 d).
Tables should be consecutively numbered throughout your dissertation,
regardless of the chapter they appear in. The number of the relevant table
must be mentioned at least once in the comments on it in the text.
Headings in the table follow the capitalisation rules for sentences. They
should be telegraphic and not much wider than the information below.
Every column (including the one furthest left) and row should have a
heading.
The relevant dimensions, currencies, and so on linked to numbers must be
clearly stated in the respective headings.
You should try to position your table in portrait form (similar to the
orientation of this page). If you are forced to position it in landscape form,
then it should appear in such a way that the page must be turned clockwise
to view it. You should not reduce the size of the typeface or otherwise try to
squeeze a table onto a page
The APA recommends that vertical lines be used sparingly.
Tables can have notes. A general note comes first. This starts with the word
Note. in italics and refers to the table as a whole. It may also provide
explanations of abbreviations, symbols, and so forth. An important use
of this form of note is to give credit to the original author of a
table that is reproduced in your dissertation (see section 4.01
for the special form of words – do not include the phrase “Reprinted
with permission” in a dissertation which is not to be published).
Specific notes come second. These refer to a particular column, row, or
individual entry (also known as a cell). They are referred to with
superscript lowercase letters (e.g., a n=24, b This participant did not take
the test., c All questionnaires were returned.).
There are rules for the handling of empty cells. If data are not applicable
such a cell should be left blank. If data could not be obtained or was not
reported you should insert a dash and explain it in the general note to the
table.

3.2 Figures
Figures should be simple, clear and exhibit continuity of style with each other
across your dissertation. By figure is meant a variety of illustrations which are not
tabular. These include graphs (line and bar), scatter plots, pie charts, diagrams, and
photographs. You should choose the form of figure which best illustrates the
information concerned and, if you can, vary your choice.
The following detailed points should be observed when working with figures:
•
•
•

The text should augment but not duplicate what is in the figure.
You should cut out detail which is not necessary.
The lettering on the figure should be large and dark enough to be read.

21

•
•

•

•

Figures which might be compared or are equally important should be
prepared to the same scale.
The number of a figure is placed, with the title on the next line, above a
figure. Both are placed outside the image part of the figure. Titles of figures
should be listed in a List of Figures with the page number on which they
appear (see section 1.02 d).
A figure may include a legend, or key, which is usually placed within the
image part of the figure. As it is an integral part of the figure, it should
have the same kind and proportion of lettering as appear in the rest of the
figure. Major words and the first word of any item should be capitalised.
As with tables, general and specific notes may be placed below a figure.
Credit should be given to the original author in a note if the
figure is reproduced from another source (see section 4.01 for
the special form of words – do not include the phrase “Reprinted with
permission” in a dissertation which is not to be published).

Figure 1
Porter’s Five Forces Model

Note. From “Porter’s Five Forces of Competitive Position Diagram”, by A. Chapman,
2005, Free Management and Training Templates, Resources and Tools, p. 273
(https://www.businessballs.com/portersfiveforcesdiagram.pdf).
•

Figures should be numbered consecutively throughout the text of your
dissertation, regardless of the chapter in which they appear. In the text,
figures should be referred to by their numbers and not as “the figure
above” or “the figure on page 14”.
22

•

•

Labels for parts of a figure should be placed as close to the components
they describe as possible. Remember to label both axes of a graph. Longer
labels on the y (=vertical) axis should be written along the axis, not
perpendicular to it.
If a figure makes use of relative numbers, then the absolute data must also
be shown.

23

4. Footnotes and Appendices

4.1 Footnotes
Footnotes in the text are of two kinds:
Content footnotes. Content footnotes supplement or amplify information in
the text. Such footnotes should be used sparingly. A content footnote should contain
only one idea that is necessary to understanding, but might otherwise interrupt the
flow of the main text if included there.
Copyright footnotes. This type of footnote is only used when you have had to
obtain written permission to quote from or use a source. In student dissertations
such footnotes appear when the work is intended for later publication.
The following forms of words, suitably adapted, should be used (as also in notes
which acknowledge tables or figures copied from another source):
•

Material reprinted from a book
1 [with copyright footnote]/Note. [with tables and figures] From Title of Book, by A. N.
Author and O. T. Author, 2006, Publisher. p. 302. Reprinted with permission
[use this phrase only if you intend to publish your work].

•

Material reprinted from an article
2 [with copyright footnote]/Note. [with tables and figures] From “Title of Article,” by
A. N. Author and O. T. Author, 2006, Title of Journal, 40, p. 22. Reprinted
with permission [use this phrase only if you intend to publish your work].

•

Material reprinted from an online source
[with tables and figures] From “Title of Table,
Graphic, etc”, by A. N. Author, 2018, Title of Publication (URL or DOI).
Reprinted with permission [use this phrase only if you intend to publish your
work].

3 [with copyright footnote]/Note.

Notice that the rules for the use of uppercase letters in article and book titles in
in-text citations and in the Bibliography do not apply in such footnotes or in the
notes to tables and figures.
Content and copyright footnotes should be numbered consecutively with
superscript numbers throughout the text regardless of which chapter they appear in.
4.2 Appendices
Appendices give you the opportunity to present lengthy detailed information
that would be distracting to read in the main body of the text. Common kinds of

24

appendices include large tables, the raw data from a questionnaire or other survey
instrument, or detailed coding information.
The following detailed points should be observed when including appendices:
•
•

•

If you have only one appendix label it Appendix; if your dissertation has
more than one appendix, label each one with a capital letter Appendix A,
Appendix B, and so on.
Each appendix must have a title (Appendix D: Raw Data From
Questionnaire), but in the text it should be referred to by its label
(Appendix D). Each appendix must be referred to at least once in the
text.
An appendix may include headings and subheadings like the main text. It
may also include tables and figures. Tables and figures should be
numbered within each appendix, the number of each being preceded by
the letter of the respective appendix (e.g., Figure B2). If there is only one
appendix, then precede the number of each table or figure with an italic A
to differentiate them from those in the main text.

25

5. Reference Citations in the Text and Bibliography

5.1 Reference Citations in the Text
5.11 Citations referring to a source as a whole (see below for the far
more common citations referring to specific parts of a source). The basis
of the APA citation system is the brief in-text reference. Readers who wish more
information about a source can then find it in the bibliography. This kind of in-text
reference takes the following forms in cases in which the source as a whole is being
referred to:
One work by one author. The surname of the author is given together with
the year of publication:
Peterson (2003) compared profit margins
In a recent study of profit margins (Peterson, 2003) …
Within the same paragraph, if you cite the same work you do not need to repeat the
year of publication, as long as there is no opportunity for confusion.
One work by multiple authors. When a work has two authors both names
should be cited every time the reference occurs in the text. If a work has three or
more authors, all the authors should be cited the first time the reference occurs. In
later citations only the surname of the first author followed by “et al.” should be used,
together with the year of publication if it is the first citation in a later paragraph.
Peterson, Waller, Milkin, and Rock (1997) found … [first citation in a text]
Peterson et al. (1997) found … [first citation made in each subsequent
paragraph]
Peterson et al. found … [year omitted from later citations in each paragraph]
Groups as authors. The names of groups that have acted as authors (e.g.,
corporations, government agencies, and study groups) are usually spelt out each time
they appear in a text citation. If, however, the name is long and cumbersome and an
abbreviation is known or is readily understandable, then an abbreviation can be used
in the second and subsequent citations.
A study of inventory levels of the time (Confederation of British Industry [CBI],
1988) … [first citation in the text]
Inventory levels at that point (CBI, 1988) … [first citation made in a subsequent
paragraph]
Works with no author. Where a work has no author (e.g. a legal text) cite
the first few words of the title and the year of publication. If the title is of a chapter or
26

article, then enclose it in double quotation marks, if it is of a book or report then it
should be italicised.
in an article on accounting standards (“GAAP in Practice,” 1998) …
in a report on auditing practices (Report of the National Commission on
Auditing, 2005) …
Authors with the same surname. If two authors have the same surname
then the authors’ respective initials should be included in all citations to avoid
confusion.
B. Peterson (1956) and M. Peterson (1958) concur in the view …
Two or more works within the same parentheses. These should be
ordered in the same order as they appear in the bibliography.
Past studies (Shepherd 1995, 2002) showed …
If the same author published works in the same year, these are differentiated by the
suffixes a, b, c, and so on after the year. These suffixes are assigned in the
bibliography.
Past analyses (Preston, 1995a, 1995b, 1995c) all showed …
If works by different authors are cited within the same parentheses these are
separated by semicolons.
Past research (Moor, 1996; Korner, 2006) showed …
5.12 Citations referring to specific parts of a source. Particular parts of
a source can be cited by indicating the page, chapter, table, or figure after the year of
publication. This should be done whenever a specific idea is taken from a
source, whether the source is paraphrased, quoted from, or not. The
words page and chapter are abbreviated in text citations. When quoting, page
numbers are always given in the text citation, which should be placed
after the quoted material.
(Peterson and Miller, 2004, p. 204)
(Peterson and Miller, 2007, pp. 205–208)
(Peterson and Miller, chap. 7)
For electronic sources do not use page numbers (unless you are citing a
printed work available in this form on the Internet), but rather use the paragraph
number, if available, preceded by the ¶ symbol or the abbreviation “para.” If

27

paragraph numbers are not visible, then cite the heading and the number of the
paragraph following it.
(Osgood, 1998, ¶ 4)
(Butler, 2008, Recommendations section, para. 2)
For audio-visual sources (e.g. a YouTube video) use a time stamp for the
beginning of the section cited in place of a page number.
Personal communications. This APA classification includes interview and
survey material, as well as emails, transcripts of telephone conversations and so
forth. These are not included in the reference list because they are not supported by
publically recoverable material. They should be cited in the text only. Reference
should be made in the text to their inclusion in any relevant appendix. In the case of
person-specific communications the surname and initials of the communicator,
together with as exact a date as possible are given.
P. Summers (personal communication, June 6, 1997)
M. Jordi (interview, June 23, 2003 – see Appendix B for transcript)
Citing legal sources. Such sources should be cited in the text as follows:
•
•

reference to a case: Peters v. Smith (1992)
reference to a statute (law): Planning and Zoning Act (1992)

Citations in parenthetical material. In a citation that appears in a
parenthetical text, you should use commas and not parentheses/brackets to separate
the date.
(See Figure 4 of Milburn and Waterman, 2011, for a representation of similar
data)
5.13 Citations and references within citations and/or references. Do
not leave out citations within material which you quote. If the citation within your
quotation is the only time it appears in your dissertation then only the work from
which you are quoting need appear in your Bibliography.
If a work to which you refer makes use of the work of others in a way in which
this secondary work is also relevant to your dissertation, then you must give credit to
all concerned. This can be done as follows:
Peters, Bellows and Vellors (2004, p. 235) refer, in developing their model, to
the approach of Maason and Uppstom (1937), which can be described as an
empirically based technique.

28

You should avoid using a readily available source to cite material that you really
want to make use of, and which you have not taken the trouble to find a copy of. In
other words, make the effort to find the original. As far as very well known models
are concerned, for example Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, you should proceed as
follows. If this occurs in a source that uses Maslow in the argument presented and
you primarily wish to make use of this argument rather than the well known model,
then citing that source alone is sufficient. You should do this in the following way in
the text:
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs (as cited in Dubbin, 1997) is central to the
contention that …
In the Bibliography you should then only list the source you have actually read, in
this case Dubbin.
If, however, you wish to make use of Maslow’s hierarchy alone, and not
Maslow’s hierarchy in the context of another source’s argument, then you should cite
Maslow’s own work (1943) list this in your Bibliography.
All material from other sources which you use, including those
which you have previously written yourself, must be properly cited.
Failure to do so may result in your being held responsible for plagiarism
or self-plagiarism, the most serious charge of misconduct in academic
writing. Citation is not only necessary when you quote from another
work, it is also required if you paraphrase or make use of the ideas of
another author in your own words. If in doubt, be cautious and cite.
5.2 Bibliography
The bibliography at the end of your dissertation provides the information
necessary to verify and retrieve each source. It must be accurate and complete in all
its details. Each entry in the bibliography usually contains the following elements:
author, year of publication, title, and details helpful to retrieval, such as the name of
the publisher, a URL or a DOI. Additionally, for instance in a dissertation proposal,
an indicative or annotated bibliography may be included. This includes a short
comment on each entry, which may indicate its relevance to the topic of the research.
5.21 Order of entries in the Bibliography. Entries should be arranged in
alphabetical order by the surname of the first author. The following rules apply in
special cases:
•
•
•

The prefixes M’, Mc, and Mac are alphabetised literally, not as if they were
all spelled Mac. Disregard apostrophes for this purpose. MacArthur
therefore precedes McAllister, and McAllister precedes M’Carthy.
Entries with numerals are alphabetised as if the numerals were spelled
out.
One-author entries by the same author are arranged by year of publication.

29

•
•
•
•
•
•

One-author entries precede multiple-author entries beginning with the
same surname.
References with the same first author and different second or third authors
are arranged alphabetically by the surname of the second author or, if the
second author is the same, by the surname of the third author, and so on.
References by the same author (or by the same two or more authors in the
same order) with the same publication date are arranged alphabetically by
the title (excluding A or The) that follows the date.
Works by different authors with the same surname are arranged
alphabetically by the first initial.
Works by group authors, such as government agencies or study groups, are
alphabetised by the first significant word of the name.
If there is no author, the title moves to the author position, and the entry is
alphabetised by the first significant word in the title.

5.22 Common types of bibliographical entry. The following are examples
of the most common types of reference as they appear in a bibliography. Careful
attention should be paid to the relevant punctuation.
•

Journal/periodical article (print or database):
Author, A. A., Author, B. B., & Author, C. C. (year). Title of article. Title of
Periodical, xx[volume no.](x)[issue number], xxx–xxx[page numbers].
Examples:
Mellors, B.A. (2000). Choice and the relative pleasure of consequences.
Psychological Bulletin, 126, 910–924.
Beatty, P. D., Berliner, A. P., Miller, F. D., & Amery, J. (1954). Political
thought in an age of consensus. Journal of Conservative Research, 43(2),
125–147.
Example citation: (Beatty et al., 1954)

•

Journal/periodical article with a DOI or URL:
Author, A. A., Author, B. B., & Author, C. C. (year). Title of article. Title of
Periodical, xx[volume no.](x)[issue number], xxx–xxx[page numbers].
URL or DOI[digital object identifier]
Examples:
Denver, M. P., Amersham, W. T., & Quick, R. T. (2018). Twittering about
viral marketing. Journal of Internet Marketing, 9(12), 17–35.
https://www.internetmarketing.co.uk/volume-9
or:
Denver, M. P., Amersham, W. T., & Quick, R. T. (2018). Twittering about
viral marketing. Journal of Internet Marketing, 9(12), 17–35.
https://doi.org/11.1190/rev715299
Example citation: (Denver et al., 2018, pp. 18-22)

30

•

A book without a DOI (print or database):
Author, A. A. (year). Title of work. Publisher.
Example:
Handy, C. (2000). Gods of management: The changing work of
organisations (3rd ed.). Arrow Books.
Example citation: (Handy, 2000, p. 54)

•

A book with a DOI:
Author, A. A. (year). Title of work. Publisher. DOI
Example:
Handy, C. (2000). Gods of management: The changing work of
organisations (3rd ed.). Arrow Books. https://doi.org/10.1111/20571615.12246
Example citation: (Handy, 2000, p. 54)

•

An ebook (e.g. Kindle book) or audio book with a URL:
Author, A. A. (year). Title of work. Publisher. DOI
Example:
Handy, C. (2000). Gods of management: The changing work of
organisations [Ebook]. Arrow Books. http://bit.org/3G0Bpbx
Example citation: (Handy, 2000, p. 54)
Note: It is not necessary to specify “ebook” or “audio book” if the content
is the same, even if the format is different.

•

An edited book without a DOI (print or database):
Editor, Z. Z. (Ed.). (year). Title of work. Publisher.
Example:
Gibson, H. M., & Galloway, T. G. (Eds.). (1963). Public management in
post-war Europe: A survey. Waverley-Winterberg.
Example citation: (Gibson & Galloway, 1963)

•

An edited book with a DOI (with multiple publishers):
Editor, Z. Z. (Ed.). (year). Title of work. Publishers. DOI
Example:
Gibson, H. M., & Galloway, T. G. (Eds.). (1963). Public management in
post-war Europe: A survey. OUP; Waverley-Winterberg.
https://doi.org/10.1039/16069-001
Example citation: (Gibson & Galloway, 1963)

•

Chapter in an edited book without a DOI (print or database):
Author, A. A., & Author, B. B. (year). Title of chapter. In A. Editor, B.
Editor, & C. Editor (Eds.), Title of book (pp. xxx–xxx). Publisher.
Example:

31

Brandt, T. M., & Wenders, R. (1989). Financial accounting in SMEs. In M.
Peters, T. Walter, & F. Müller (Eds.), Verifying business success (pp. 236–
312). Business Press.
Example citation: (Brandt & Wenders, 1989)
•

Chapter in an edited book with a DOI:
Author, A. A., & Author, B. B. (year). Title of chapter. In A. Editor, B.
Editor, & C. Editor (Eds.), Title of book (pp. xxx–xxx). Publisher. DOI
Example:
Brandt, T. M., & Wenders, R. (1989). Financial accounting in SMEs. In M.
Peters, T. Walter, & F. Müller (Eds.), Verifying business success (pp. 236–
312). Business Press. https://doi.org/10.1040/0000119-013
Example citation: (Brandt & Wenders, 1989)

•

Entry in an encyclopaedia or dictionary:
Author, A. A. (year). Title of entry. In Title of work. Retrieval date and
URL.
Example:
Weskamp, B. (2019). Political thought. In The Stanford encyclopedia of
philosophy. Retrieved August 31, 2019, from
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/polthought/
Example citation: (Weskamp, 2019)

•

A magazine or newspaper article:
Author, A. A., & Author, B. B. (year, month, day). Title of article. Title of
Magazine. URL
Example:
Wentworth, W. Z., & Hirter, T. V. (2014, July 22). Color in advertising.
Marketing Weekly.
https://www.marketingweekly.com/wp/2019/7/22/color-in-advertising
Example citation: (Wentworth and Hirter, 2014)

•

A (government) report:
Name of Institution. (year). Title of report (Details of series). URL.
Example:
United Nations. (2017). Peacekeeping in Europe (Current Strategic Issues
No. 234-1). https://www.un.org/publications/strategic_234-1.pdf
Example citation: (UN, 2017, pp. 17-54)

•

Report from a company/NPO (with no author identified):
Name of Company/NGO (year). Title of report. (Document Series and
number – if applicable). URL
Example:

32

Central Swiss Banking Institute (2017). Business innovation climate
report (Central Swiss Business Reports No. 27).
https://csbi.ch/reports/27.pdf
Example citation: (Central Swiss Banking Institute, 2017)
•

Non-English book:
Author, A. A. (year). Title of work in the original language [Translation of
title of work]. Publisher.
Example:
Thommen, J-P. (1996). Managementorientierte Betriebswirtschaftslehre
[Management-oriented business administration] (5th ed.). Versus.
Example citation: (Thommen, 1996, pp. 45-46)

•

Journal/periodical article published in translation:
Author, A. A. (year). Title of article (A. Translator, Trans). Title of
Periodical, xx[volume no.](x)[issue number], xxx–xxx[page numbers].
URL or DOI (Original work published year)
Example:
Erhard, L. (1970). Prosperity for all (M. Trevor, Trans). Journal of
European Economics, 27(2), 32-51. https://doi.org/13.1674/000271338
(Original work published 1961)
Example citation: (Erhard, 1961/1970)

•

Unpublished thesis or dissertation:
Author, A. A. (year). Title of work [unpublished X thesis], XYZ University.
Example:
Adam, J. (2018). Community finance in Central Switzerland
[Unpublished MSc dissertation]. Lucerne University of Applied Sciences
and Arts.
Example citation: (Adam, 2018)

•

Thesis or dissertation published online (not in a database):
Author, A. A. (year). Title of work [X thesis, XYZ University]. XYZ
University Digital Archive. URL
Example:
Zander, P. (2018). Community finance in Maryland [Master’s thesis,
Maryland University]. University of Maryland System Digital Archive.
https://digitalarchive.um.edu/handle/ZanderPaul2018.pdf
Example citation: (Zander, 2018, p. 47)

•

Conference session:
Author, A. & Author, B. (year, month day(s)). Title [Conference Session].
Host of conference, Location. URL
Example:

33

Mather, D & Miller, R. (2019, July 2-4). Everybody can be an intrapreneur
[Conference session]. Entrepreneurs Society, London, UK.
https://entresoc.conference.org/2019/session35.html
Example citation: (Mather & Miller, 2019)
•

Chapter or section in an Internet document:
Title (year, month day). Title of section. In Title of work (chap. number).
Retrieved month day, year, from source [give the URL or database]
Example:
Silverman Foundation. (2008, November 9). Ways to build your business.
In Small-business legends (chap.4). Retrieved September 14, 2010, from
http://www.smallbusiness.org/library
Example citation: (Silverman Foundation, 2008)

•

Online stand-alone document (with no author identified):
Title of document. (year). Retrieved month day, year, from source [give the
URL or database]
Example (with no date of publication):
Swiss IT-user’s WWW survey. (n.d.). Retrieved August 14, 2009, from
http://www.schweizonline.ch/archiv
Example citation: (Swiss IT-user’s WWW survey, n.d., para 46)

•

Blog post:
Author, A. (year, month day). Title of post. Name of blog. URL
Example:
Geek, P. (2020, March 14). Happiness is the reward of waiting. Flowers.
https://blogs.edi.org/flowers/2020/03/14/happiness-is/
Example citation: (Geek, 2020)

•

YouTube video:
Uploader, A. (year, month day). Title of video [Video]. Name of streaming
service. URL
Example:
Chandler, R. (2018, September 5). Virtue [Video]. YouTube.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gp2xGgOZJb2
Example citation: (Chandler, 2018)
Note: The person or group who uploaded the video is credited as the
author, even if they did not create the work, as this facilitates retrieval.
Others who contributed to, or appeared in, the video can be mentioned in
the relevant section of the text.

•

A legal case (civil):
Plaintiff v. Defendant, Volume Source Page (Court Date). URL
Example:
34

Peters v. Smith, 240 F. Supp. 562 (W.D. MA. 2008).
https://www.oyez.org/cases/2001-2010/240ma562
Example citation: (Peters v. Smith, 2008)
•

A statute (law):
Name of Act, Volume Source § Paragraph (Year)
Example:
Planning and Zoning Act, 15 Public General Acts 56 Eliz 2 c 90 § 4 et seq.
(2008). www.publicacts.uk.gov/2008.90.pdf
Example citation: (Planning and Zoning Act, 2008)

The following detailed points should be noted when formulating such entries:
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•
•

If no date of publication is available, write (n.d.).
In ascertaining the date of publication, ignore reprint dates. Only edition
dates are of significance.
If a work has been accepted for publication, but not yet published, write (in
press) in place of the date of publication.
In the title of a non-periodical, or of an article or chapter, capitalise only
the first word of the title and any proper nouns. Do not use any quotation
marks for the title of an article or chapter in a bibliography entry.
Do not use Vol. before the volume number of a journal/periodical. If each
issue of a journal/ periodical begins with a page 1, then give the issue
number in parentheses immediately after the volume number, for example
23(2). Note that volume (but not issue) numbers are italicised.
If a journal/periodical does not use volume numbers, then include the
month, season or other designation with the year, for example (1998,
June).
With an article or a chapter from a non-periodical work the editors initials
and names are not given in reversed order and the normal comma rules
apply (i.e., no comma between two editors names, commas from three
editors and more). For a book with no editor, simply include the word In
before the book title.
Give the name of the publisher in as brief a form as possible. Omit terms
such as Co., Inc., and so on.
With online items, do not finish the retrieval information with a full stop if
it is a URL or DOI.

5.3 Other (non-APA) standards
The main alternative to in-text citation is the so-called note citation system. In
this footnotes or endnotes are used. The Chicago Manual of Style provides
information on this approach to citation and referencing, but does not concentrate
on it exclusively and invites an open approach to the various formats available. This
is realistic as different academic journals either have their own style sheets or require
contributors to use one system or another.
35

In recent years citation software has become available. Much like translation
software it is useful within the limits of the accuracy it can provide. Students require
to understand the detail of the system they are required to use, if for no other reason
than that the output of citation software need to be rigorously checked.
You should also be aware of the in-text citation by page number approach favoured
by the Modern Language Association (MLA). This latter should be contrasted with
the APA in-text approach, which uses the year of publication and adds page numbers
for specific location of the citation within the work in question.

36

6. The Abstract/Management Summary

The term Abstract is used in doctoral theses and in the arts and sciences.
Management Summary is used in business administration studies and reports. The
Management Summary should not read like an Introduction, nor is it a repetition of
the conclusions and/or recommendations of your dissertation. Rather it is a
comprehensive summary of the contents of your entire work, which is intended to
enable the reader to survey your dissertation quickly. It should therefore be the very
last item you write.
The Management Summary also allows abstracting and information services to
index your dissertation. Future readers may have their first contact with your work
through the management summary, very possibly on a computer screen, and it is
likely that they will decide whether to read more on this basis. For these reasons a
management summary should be dense with information, but also easy to read, well
organised, and self-contained. Try to embed key words in your management
summary so that computer retrieval systems will pick them up and make your
dissertation easier to find. Also try to make the first paragraph interesting, because
your management summary may be seen on screen with others and, therefore, only
the first paragraph may be visible without scrolling or further clicking.
A one-page management summary is ideal, but often very difficult to achieve.
Two, or at most three, pages may be necessary. The length is dictated by how much
text it takes to briefly explain the problem the dissertation addresses, the methods
used to investigate it, the findings, and the discussion, conclusions and
recommendations based on these findings. A management summary should be nonevaluative. In other words you should not comment on your work or add to it.
The Management Summary should read as a coherent piece of self-contained
prose text. It should have paragraphs, use verbs rather than noun equivalents, and be
written in the third person. Results and conclusions should be described in the
present tense. Methods applied and the details of your investigation should be
explained in the past tense. You should paraphrase rather than quote and with
citations of other publications give the name and initials, together with the date of
publication.

37

7. Final Submission

Finally submitting your work is a time-consuming process which can take days
rather than hours. Allow sufficient time to check the quality of your text, the logic of
its organisation, the detail of its citation and referencing, and the aesthetics of its
appearance.
Bear in mind that a dissertation is a product. Thinking about the aesthetics of
what you produce will add to its attractiveness. This in turn will influence the frame
of mind of the reader (and examiner). The aim should be to make your dissertation
something that the potential reader wants to pick up and read.
Remember to check the specific submission requirements of your degree
programme. This includes requirements for the inclusion of appendices and of raw
data material.
7.1 Paper or bound submission
Special attention should be paid to the following points:
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

Dissertations should be presented in a one-volume bound format. Tape
bindings of a brochure kind are particularly suitable.
Use white A4 paper of a suitable weight (c. 80 g/m2) printed on one side
only.
An electronic version, preferably in PDF format, should be attached to
each volume.
The left-hand margin of the text should be 4 cm (to allow for binding).
Other margins should be no less than 2.5 cm.
Your text should be set at what Word describes as “1.5 lines”. In other
words a form of double-spacing that does not unnecessarily add to the bulk
of the finished volume.
Choose a typeface that has serifs to improve readability. Times New
Roman or Georgia are good choices. Use Georgia or Times New Roman at
12 points or your own choice of typeface at an equivalent size. A sans serif
typeface may be used in figures to add to a clean visual impression.
Number the pages consecutively with Arabic numerals throughout your
dissertation, including any appendices, taking the title page as the first
page. The APA suggests putting page numbers in the upper right-hand
corner of the page. As you will see here, this position is not mandatory.
Some pages (e.g. the first page of each chapter) may not have a number
printed on them, but should nevertheless be counted for pagination
purposes. Some pages may also, for aesthetic reasons (e.g. depending on
the use of diagrams or graphics), have the page number printed in a place
other than the one you have selected as standard.
As described in Chapter One, the use of page headers may assist the reader
in identifying where a particular page belongs in your work, especially if
the pages become separated.

38

7.2 Online or electronic submission
This form is known as an ETD (“Electronic Thesis/Dissertation”). Particular
attention should be paid to the following:
•

•

•

The online submission of a dissertation uses the version that would have
been submitted on paper. In other words all the previous advice (about, for
example, appearance, pagination, appendices, and so on), with the
exception of those points which refer to the physical preparation of copies
of the dissertation, should be followed.
The dissertation should be presented as a one-file .pdf. You should check
that the .pdf file is a faithful representation of the word-processing file it is
generated from, including such features as fonts, accents on letters,
pagination, graphics and so on.
This format allows for the use of hyperlinks to guide the reader through
the work and to facilitate access to the works cited, including audio and
video material.

39

8. Presenting Your Dissertation

As part of the examination of a dissertation, or for the purposes of making the
work known to a commissioner of the work or a conference audience, you may be
required to present the material. The following guidelines may be of assistance:
General
•
Don’t try to present the whole dissertation. Pick out what is likely to be of
interest and which will enable you to construct a story for the presenting time
available.
•
Remember that the language of a presentation is oral not written.
•
You may need to create new visuals which are not in the dissertation to better
explain material in a presentation.
•
Remember that you are part of the presentation. Your appearance, use of voice
and responsiveness to your audience may be as important as the content of
what you want to say.
Structure
•
A presentation should have a story arc, which has an arresting beginning, an
easy-to-follow body, and a clear ending with takeaways if possible.
•
Introduce yourself and your subject clearly. Contextualise the subject in the
relevant wider research and/or practically oriented field(s).
•
Aim to present a limited number of main points (3 to 4 in a 10-minute
presentation).
•
Build a story using a chain of sections each with its own objective and interim
summary, all of which should lead to the crescendo of your work, the
conclusions and, if appropriate, the recommendations.
•
If you forget something, then forget it.
Language
•
Use oral language (short sentences, as few subordinate clauses as possible, and
a minimum of meaning-carrying nouns). Do not read. Speak to slides.
•
Make use of the meta-language of presentations, especially to link the various
parts of what you say together. Phrases such as “let’s”, I’d like to”, “as you can
see”, “as I said”, “in conclusion”, and “to sum up” are essential.
•
With graphs and charts in particular, make sure you explain the layout,
highlight the important points, and then say what important point the graphic
makes.
•
Speak at a speed which people can follow. Remember, your audience doesn’t
know what you know, so give them time. Let your voice rise and fall and make
your pauses meaningful. Avoid “um’s” and “ah’s”.
•
Speak persuasively and engage with questions fully. Be self-critical and modest
(especially about the significance of results) without indulging in psychobabble.

40

Visualisation (and PowerPoint)
•
Visuals will be remembered more than the spoken word. Make each one
meaningful and/or entertaining, including the last one (avoid a slide which says
“Questions” – use a logo or the title of your dissertation repeated at the end
instead).
•
Use a mixture of different visuals and graphics (e.g. pictures, diagrams, models,
graphs and charts).
•
With PowerPoint (or any other suitable presentation tool) pay attention to: not
having too many slides, spelling, and avoiding the over-use of lists. No more
than 50% of your slides should be in list form. Bullet points should be no longer
than one line. Every slide should have a title and, in English, every title should
include a verb.
•
If you (are required to) produce a handout, avoid simply copying your slides. A
handout should be complementary to what you present and should represent in
itself a takeaway.
You as the presenter
•
Position yourself in the room to use any equipment effectively. Remove
unnecessary barriers between yourself and the audience.
•
Avoid unnecessary body language (playing with objects in your pocket or
hands)
•
Use gestures, facial expressions, movements, and eye contact with meaning and
purpose.
•
Dress so as not to distract from your message and in a manner suitable to the
occasion.
•
Treat the audience in such a way that they feel respected, but take the time to
explain material they cannot be expected to have prior knowledge of.
•
Establish your presence with a clear beginning and an equally clear ending.

41

Bibliography
Concise rules of APA style. (2010). (6th ed.). American Psychological Association.
Gelfand, H., Walker, C. J., & American Psychological Association (2002). Mastering
APA style: Student’s workbook and training guide (5th ed.). American Psychological
Association.
Graduate School, University of Colorado Boulder, “Electronic Thesis and
Dissertation Submission”, retrieved October 17, 2017, from
https://www.colorado.edu/graduateschool/academic-resources/electronic-thesisand-dissertation-submission
Hulcoop, L. (1996). Study guide: A practical handbook for the writing of
assignments. Unpublished manuscript, English Language Institute, University of
Surrey.
Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50(4),
370–96.
Nicol, A. & Pexman, P. (2010). Displaying your findings: a practical guide for
creating figures, posters, and presentations. American Psychological Association.
Nicol, A. & Pexman, P. (2010). Presenting your findings: a practical guide for
creating tables. American Psychological Association.
Publication manual of the American Psychological Association (7th ed.). (2020).
American Psychological Association.
Turabian, K. L. (2007). A manual for writers of research papers, theses, and
dissertations: Chicago style for students and researchers (5th ed.). University of
Chicago.

42

Appendix A: Declaration of Sole Authorship
I, ____________________________ (insert your name), hereby certify that
the attached work, ________________________________ (insert the title of
your assignment), is wholly and completely my own and that I have indicated all the
sources (printed, electronic, personal, etc.) that I have consulted. Any sections
quoted from these sources are clearly indicated in quotation marks or are otherwise
so declared. I further attest that I have included acknowledgement of the name(s) of
any person(s) consulted in the course of preparing this assignment.

Signed:

___________________________

Date:

___________________________

43

Appendix B: Checklist for Dissertation Preparation
B.1 Organisation of the dissertation
Done
Cover page
Title page
Management Summary
Table of Contents
Any Lists (e.g. of Illustrations) and any Note
Preface
Introduction
Literature Review
Methods/Procedures
Results
Discussion/Conclusions
Recommendations
Bibliography/References
Appendix/Appendices
Declaration of Sole Authorship

B.2 Referencing (Check which system you are using.)
Done
Originals consulted and references (double-)checked
All quotations referenced
All paraphrases referenced
All in-text references matched by references in the Bibliography
All illustrations (including that on the cover page, if any), tables and figures sourced where
they are not your own

B.3 Sequencing
Done
Page numbers in logical sequence
Chapters and sections logically numbered
All tables, figures and illustrations numbered logically and with a matching title in an
appropriate List (e.g. of Figures)

44

All abbreviations explained and, where appropriate, included in a List or in a Note
All Appendices mentioned at least once in the main text of the dissertation and numbered
appropriately

B.4 Appearance/Presentation of the dissertation
(Check which format is required.)
Done
Page margins of the right size and consistent throughout the dissertation
Pages and their elements are correctly paginated (e.g. any footnotes appear on the
appropriate page, graphics are not preceded or followed by unnecessary empty space, etc.)
Fonts, line spacing, paragraph indents and spacing, and positioning of page numbers and
page headers are consistent throughout the dissertation
The number of copies to be handed in (incl. those in electronic form) is clear. OR The
channel for electronic submission and confirmation of receipt is clear.

45

